In this lecture, you'll learn about the bottom four OSI Layers. Where network engineers are not typically
very concerned with the top three layers,
we are very concerned with the bottom four layers.
This is really bread and butter stuff for us.
Each of these bottom four layers are so important that they're going to have their own dedicated section
later on in the course.
Here, I'm going to focus on giving you the definitions which you're going to need to know for the exam.
So the first of the bottom four layers, we'll start with Layer 4, which is with Transport Layer.
The main characteristics of this layer, are whether TCP or UDP transport is going to be used, and the port
number.
Now, if you don't know anything about TCP or UDP or port numbers already, don't worry about it too much
for now because we're gonna be covering this in the dedicated section for Layer 4 later.
For now, you just need to know that if we want the communication between the two hosts to be reliable,
then we'll use TCP.
If speed is more important than reliability, like for voice or video of traffic, then we'll use UDP
instead.
The other main characteristic at this layer is the port number.
For example, port number 80
for HTTP web traffic, port number 25 for SMTP email.
Now, there is quite a lot of other information also in the Layer 4 header, but we'll talk about that when
we get to that particular section in the course.
The definition for Layer 4, the Transport Layer defines services to segment, transfer, and reassemble
the data for individual communications between the end devices.
It breaks down large files into smaller segments that are less likely to incur transmission problems.
The next layer is Layer 3, the Network Layer.
The most important information at the Network Layer is the source and destination IP address.
Again, there's a lot of other information also carried in the Layer 3 header, but we'll talk about that
when we get to the later section. Routers are Layer 3 devices.
They operate at Layer 3 of the OSI model, and the definition of the Network Layer, it provides connectivity
and path selection between two host systems
that may be located on geographically separated networks. The Network Layer is the layer that manages
the connectivity of hosts by providing logical addressing. IP addressing is our logical addressing.
Next layer is Layer 2, the Data Link Layer.
The most important information here is the source and destination Layer 2 address.
Again, just like with Layer 3 and 4, there is other information also included in the Layer 2 header.
For example, the source and destination MAC address if Ethernet is the Layer 2 technology. Different Layer 2
technologies use different formats for their addressing. For example, old legacy Frame Relay uses
DLCI or DLCI numbers for the addressing. With Ethernet, which is what is always used in our Local
Area Networks, it's the MAC address that is used here. Switches operate at
Layer 2. Our switches are Layer 2 aware devices. The definition for Data Link Layer, it defines how
data is formatted for transmission and how access to the physical media is controlled.
It also typically includes error detection on correction to ensure a reliable delivery of the data.
And finally, we have Layer 1, the Physical Layer.
This concerns literally the physical components of the network.
For example, the actual physical cables being used. Definition of the Physical Layer, it enables bit transmission,
the 1s and 0s, between end devices. It defines specifications needed for activating, maintaining, and
deactivating the physical link between end devices. For example, voltage levels, physical data rates, maximum
transmission distances, and physical connectors, etc.
Okay,
so there you have it.
That was the quick overview and mainly the definition of the bottom four layers. As we go through the
rest of the course, we'll be covering those in much more detail.